worldwide online retail has been on the
rise
in 2019 alone shoppers spent nearly 3.8
trillion dollars online and to keep
those figures climbing some companies
are pulling out all of the stops
to hold your attention and to keep you
spending to help you regain
control of your shopping environment
i'll identify three of their tactics and
share
three tips to counteract them
[Music]
one online gimmick that sites use is
gamification
and this is where websites use game
design elements to get you to spend more
time and more money on their sites
now some sites have a virtual wheel for
you to spin to get a chance at that
day's discounts
others they let your crew loyalty points
based on how you interact with the site
and that kind of gamification in my mind
is really dangerous
in one classic experiment lab rats were
more captivated by the random chance of
pushing a lever and receiving a food
pellet
than by the certainty of a fixed food
schedule and we as humans are just the
same
we're enticed by the chance to win just
like at a slot machine in vegas you
increase your dopamine levels every time
you try your luck
so my tip here is to avoid temptation
altogether by
unsubscribing from online shopping
emails you can't buy what you can't see
and these emails are constant reminders
that are intended to lure us back to the
site with its gamifications and its
gimmick when you'd otherwise not be
thinking about them
a second tactic online retailers use is
scarcity
many sites now tell you how many other
customers are also viewing the same item
making it seem like that item is very
popular and it's likely to go quickly
similarly websites will use a timer for
your basket
pushing and pushing the message that
these potential items won't be available
for long
research shows that the perceptions of a
product scarcity
can increase its value in the eye of the
shopper and increase a shopper's
willingness to buy
scarcity can also make people feel more
competitive and selfish as well
so here's my tip to help you combat
scarcity when scarcity is tempting you
back away from the website back away
from the cart and sleep on it
that can help you decide whether or not
you really need whatever it is that you
were planning on buying
leave the site for at least an entire
day and see if you're still
itching for the item this approach works
best if you use an incognito browser so
you won't be haunted by the ads for the
product
everywhere you go the third tactic that
companies use is to allow you to pay in
installments
a number of e-commerce sites have
adopted payment schemes
that will let you order an item and pay
for it later
now installment plans are useful if
you're replacing a large expensive item
like a broken refrigerator but i think
these installment plans veer towards
predatory when you're purchasing
less urgent less important items looking
at
small monthly payments psychologically
decreases the cost of those
new sneakers or new pair jeans and that
mental trickery means that you're more
likely to buy
additional items and while it may feel
different from a credit card you still
owe these companies
money so at the end of the day you're
still taking on debt and potentially
adding late fees and
interest and you may find yourself owing
a lot more than the original sticker
value for those jeans
so here's my third and final tip above
all else
do not use these payment installment
plans if you want an
actual discount there are browser
plugins you can use that will help you
find the best deals
online retail has made shopping
incredibly convenient
but not every day needs to feel as
overwhelming as black friday
by putting these tips into practice you
can tune out some of the tricks and the
gimmicks and once again
regain control of your shopping
environment